By some curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the world, when there was 
less noise and more green, and the hobbits were still numerous and prosperous, and 
Bilbo Baggins was standing at his door after breakfast smoking an enormous long 
wooden pipe that reached nearly down to his woolly toes (neatly brushed) - Gandalf 
came by. Gandalf! If you had heard only a quarter of what I have heard about him, and I 
have only heard very little of all there is to hear, you would be prepared for any sort I of 
remarkable tale. 
Tales and adventures sprouted up all over the place wherever he went, in the most 
extraordinary fashion. He had not been down that way under The Hill for ages and ages, 
not since his friend the Old Took died, in fact, and the hobbits had almost forgotten what 
he looked like. He had been away over The Hill and across The Water on business of 
his own since they were all small hobbit-boys and hobbit-girls. 
All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that morning was an old man with a staff. He had a 
tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, a silver scarf over which a white beard hung 
down below his waist, and immense black boots. 
"Good morning!" said Bilbo, and he meant it. The sun was shining, and the grass was 
very green. But Gandalf looked at him from under long bushy eyebrows that stuck out 
further than the brim of his shady hat. "What do you mean?" be said. "Do you wish me a 
good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether I want not; or that you feel 
good this morning; or that it is morning to be good on?" 
"All of them at once," said Bilbo. "And a very fine morning for a pipe of tobacco out of 
doors, into the bargain. If you have a pipe about you, sit down and have a fill of mine! 
There's no hurry, we have all the day before us!" 
Then Bilbo sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his legs, and blew out a beautiful 
grey ring of smoke that sailed up into the air without breaking and floated away over The 
Hill. 
"Very pretty!" said Gandalf. "But I have no time to blow smoke-rings this morning. I am 
looking for someone to share in an adventure that I am arranging, and it's very difficult to 
find anyone." 
«I should think so - in these parts! We are plain quiet folk and have no use for 
adventures. Nasty disturbing uncomfortable things! Make you late for dinner! I can't think 
what anybody sees in them,» said our Mr. Baggins, and stuck one thumb behind his 
braces, and blew out another even bigger smokering. 
Then he took out his morning letters, and begin to read, pretending to take no more 
notice of the old man. He had decided that he was not quite his sort, and wanted him to 
go away. But the old man did not move. He stood leaning on his stick and gazing at the 
hobbit without saying anything, till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even a little cross. 
"Good morning!" he said at last. "We don't want any adventures here, thank you! You 
might try over The Hill or across The Water." By this he meant that the conversation was 
at an end. 
"What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!" said Gandalf. "Now you mean that 
you want to get rid of me, and that it won't be good till I move off." 
"Not at all, not at all, my dear sir! Let me see, I don't think I know your name?" 
"Yes, yes, my dear sir - and I do know your name, Mr. Bilbo Baggins. And you do know 
my name, though you don't remember that I belong to it. I am Gandalf, and Gandalf 
means me! To think that I should have lived to be goodmorninged by Belladonna Took's 
son, as if I was selling buttons at the door!" 
"Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not the wandering wizard that gave Old Took a 
pair of magic diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came undone till 
ordered? Not the fellow who used to tell such wonderful tales at parties, about dragons 
and goblins and giants and the rescue of princesses and the unexpected luck of widows' 
sons? Not the man that used to make such particularly excellent fireworks! I remember 
those! Old Took used to have them on Midsummer's Eve. Splendid! They used to go up 
like great lilies and snapdragons and laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight all 
evening!" You will notice already that Mr. Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to 
believe, also that he was very fond of flowers. "Dear me!" she went on. "Not the Gandalf 
who was responsible for so many quiet lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad 
adventures. Anything from climbing trees to visiting Elves - or sailing in ships, sailing to 
other shores! Bless me, life used to be quite inter - I mean, you used to upset things 
badly in these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I had no idea you were still 
in business." 
"Where else should I be?" said the wizard. "All the same I am pleased to find you 
remember something about me. You seem to remember my fireworks kindly, at any rate, 
land that is not without hope. Indeed for your old grandfather Took's sake, and for the 
sake of poor Belladonna, I will give you what you asked for." 
"I beg your pardon, I haven't asked for anything!" 
"Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you. In fact I will go so far as to send 
you on this adventure. Very amusing for me, very good for you and profitable too, very 
likely, if you ever get over it." 
"Sorry! I don't want any adventures, thank you. Not today. Good morning! 
But please come to tea - any time you like! Why not tomorrow? Come tomorrow! 
Good-bye!" 
With that the hobbit turned and scuttled inside his round green door, and shut it as 
quickly as he dared, not to seen rude. Wizards after all are wizards. 
"What on earth did I ask him to tea for!" he said to him-self, as he went to the pantry. He 
had only just had break fast, but he thought a cake or two and a drink of something 
would do him good after his fright. Gandalf in the meantime was still standing outside the 
door, and laughing long but quietly. 
After a while he stepped up, and with the spike of his staff scratched a queer sign on the 
hobbit's beautiful green front-door. Then he strode away, just about the time when Bilbo 
was finishing his second cake and beginning to think that he had escape adventures 
very well. 
The next day he had almost forgotten about Gandalf. He did not remember things very 
well, unless he put them down on his Engagement Tablet: like this: Gandalf '¥a 
Wednesday. Yesterday he had been too flustered to do anything of the kind. Just before 
tea-time there came a tremendous ring on the front-door bell, and then he remembered! 
He rushed and put on the kettle, and put out another cup and saucer and an extra cake 
or two, and ran to the door. 
"I am so sorry to keep you waiting!" he was going to say, when he saw that it was not 
Gandalf at all. It was a dwarf with a blue beard tucked into a golden belt, and very bright 
eyes under his dark-green hood. As soon a the door was opened, he pushed inside, just 
as if he had been expected. 
He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest peg, and "Dwalin at your service!" he said with 
a low bow. 
"Bilbo Baggins at yours!" said the hobbit, too surprised to ask any questions for the 
moment. When the silence that followed had become uncomfortable, he added: "I am 
just about to take tea; pray come and have some with me." A little stiff perhaps, but he 
meant it kindly. And what would you do, if an uninvited dwarf came and hung his things 
up in your hall without a word of explanation?